Keywords: pnp skills bonuses penalties rpg

## Introduction

The major problem with flaws in role-playing systems is that they are usually
minor transactions of bonuses and penalties that typically become relegated to
some more-or-less meaningless fluff trait, or a vehicle for min-maxxers to
express themselves. An interesting take on the system, for me, would be for
flaws to more inherently represent the sacrifices a character has made to get
where they are. Simultaneously, advancement in RPGs is almost ways presented as
a strict improvement of abilities, but just as interesting (if not more so) than
the ways a character has improved are the things they have sacrificed to get
there. In most RPGs, telling that part of the story is relegated to GM-guided
events, but not really supported inherently by the system. The following
proposal is a random thought I had toward fulfilling that goal.

## Proposal: Flaws as Character Path Choices

In most character advancement systems, there is either implicitly or explicitly
a tree that describes various ways the character can increase in power. In most
of these systems, the downside of choosing one path over another is that of not
having access to other paths. This downside is concrete, in that it translates
into real penalties for the character, but it is also invisible in the way that
opportunity cost inherently tends to be. The idea in this document is that those
trade-offs should be rendered explicitly by forcing a character to choose a
defining flaw in order to advance beyond some "normal" maximum. Ideally, the
flaws themselves would be thematically related to the thing being improved, and
the point being driven home here is that a lot of the people who have focused on
perfecting some art beyond the normal level of average people have given up some
things we take for granted in order to achieve that. To soften the blow and
drive home the specialization, each flaw might be related to an unsubstitutable,
related perk that represents some facet that the character is particularly good
at, even compared to other people at their level. In this way, every point of
advancement beyond the "natural" maximum represents a choice of path down a
character tree, at the end of which lies someone who has specialized into a
defining role.

By way of example, we will assume some skill-based system, where 0 is
"untrained", 3 is "a talented layman", 5 is "well-regarded expert on a local
scale", 8 is "a dedicated professional who has spent years honing their craft",
and 10 is "unparalleled in ability by any contemporary; worthy of legend". Five,
here, is meant to be as far as anyone can expect to get without spending so much
time in the ability that they neglect other pursuits.

Say that Alex is very good at Perception, and has reached a five in it--in their
party, they are at least as good at anyone else, and better than most. Suppose
they wish to push themselves into a rarer category and really become a person
defined by their ability to see what is normally unseen. She might take a perk
called "Scent", which reads, "The character gains +1 to Perception. In addition,
the character may smell things that are otherwise unseen--treat any creature
that generates some sort of odor (and has not taken effort to mask it) as being
visible if they are within 30', even if they otherwise would not be. In trade,
the character becomes very susceptible to attacks that rely on smell (-2 to
resist any such attack). If the immediate area is defined by a powerful odor
(sewer tunnels, sulfur-emitting vents, and the like), the character loses all
benefits of Scent (including the bonus to Perception) while in the area."

Other examples:

Jumpy (Perception): The character reacts more quickly to present dangers. Gain a
+1 to Perception, as well as a +1 to rolls made to determine acting order
("Initiative", in D&D parlance), and rolls made to avoid dangers ("Reflex
Saves"). While sleeping, there is a 10% chance any given night that the
character will start at random noises, causing them to count as having received
one less hour of sleep for the given period.

Honest (Diplomacy): The character trades on a reputation of honoring their word
in negotiations, and other people treat them more favorably from that
expectation. Gain a +1 to Diplomacy, and an additional +1 when dealing with any
character who uses a lie as the basis for the diplomatic exchange. The character
immediately loses these benefits within a local area if they are caught in a
lie, and gains an additional -2 with the other participant of the exchange.
These penalties may only be removed through a significant act of heroism
(generally, an atonement quest assigned by the GM that should ideally feature
honesty as a core requirement for completion).
