## Rules of Multiplayer Games

This isn't actually a list of rules, in the sense that they have to be followed.
It's more of a list of guiding principles of what would make, to me, an
interesting multiplayer experience. Some of the guidelines might apply as well
to single-player games--I don't know, I'm still not very organized with all
this.

## Definitions, as I Come Up with Them

These are here because I might mean really specific things when I say them, and
need to distinguish those meanings from the regular way words are used.

Optimal - "Optimal" play is play that produces an objectively better result, by
some measurement that the game provides. That measurement may be any number of
things that produce gratificiation, be it points, bragging rights, social
status, whatever--the point is that out of multiple paths, one is optimal if
there exists some meaningful reason within the game's framework for a player to
choose it over the others.

1. Remove tedium, unless that tedium specifically supports something that you
need. I get if there is some abstraction of "training" where you are actually
training the user to do certain game mechanics, and that that might include some
repetitive things. I know that a game pretty naturally includes repetitive
experiences sometimes, because there is a limit to the novelty that can be
packed into an experience. But the maker of a game should always strive to
remove mechanics that add nothing to gameplay. In particular, "optimal" play
should not include tedious elements that non-optimal paths do not have.

    a. (correlary to 1) If there is a way for a player to automate some game
    mechanic away, the blame does not rest with that player for automating away
    the mechanic. The blame rests in the designer for including a game mechanic
    that the player would rather automate away than actually play.

2. Give players tools. Scripting is a great way to expose 1 and its correlaries.
If you're following 1a, it will not matter that the players *can* make a
computer do a bunch of their work for them, because they will only do so with
things that are unimportant anyway.
